## Consequences of bad sleep & disrupted CR
Given the essential role of sleep for productivity and overall health, there are often significant consequences when a person’s circadian rhythm is off.

>One can also say, less sleep leads to less energy for physical activities (workouts), more cravings for food, less mental clarity, and poor mood.

As sleep expert Matt Walker once [said](https://open.spotify.com/episode/4KNsmuCgX6lz8GE2J3393Y?si=d1f79620621349ea) it works both ways:> **How you eat can effect how you sleep, but how you sleep can also affect how you eat.**

 _Personal experience:_ I don’t usually crave sweets and carbs, but I’ve noticed this happening a couple of times lately, and turns out I was sleep-deprived on those days. I have had food craving all day long when I eat and eat and yet I still feel like eating more. I have had a general knowledge about sleep deprivation leading to food cravings but accepted it as a fact in the aftermath of observing its effects on my body. I crave all unhealthy foods when I’m deficient in sleep as in quality as well as in quantity. One of my mantras for healthy living now is **‘‘fix your sleep first, then your diet’’**.

**Less sleep=more ghrelin** (ghrelin: the appetite increaser, is released primarily in the stomach and is thought to signal hunger to the brain), **less leptin** (function of leptin: help regulate the long-term balance between your body's food intake and energy use), **less melatonin** (function of melatonin: regulating the circadian system and sleep patterns), **more cortisol** (cortisol: main stress hormone).

Without the proper signaling from the body’s internal clock, a person can struggle to fall asleep and their total sleep can be reduced.

**Disrupted circadian rhythm=shallower, fragmented, and lower-quality sleep and a rise in serious sleeping problems such** **as** **insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness.**

If you have poor/broken sleep you will have problems in every other part of your body and every other sphere of your life. From obesity and diabetes to menstrual disruptions, hormone disruptions (estrogen, testosterone, FSH), sex, and relationship. 

**Research findings:**

- Circadian Rhythm Disruption Increases **Tumor Growth** Rate and Accumulation of Myeloid‐Derived Suppressor [Cells](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adbi.202200031).
- Sleep deprivation has been shown to increase the risk of chronic diseases such as [**diabetes**](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19444258/) and [**heart conditions**](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27467177/).
- ''Optimal sleep and I’m not referring to how many hours, but more about the quality of your sleep, will enhance your **immune system and reduce inflammation**. That alone is your best defense strategy in preventing oral disease'' said [Dr. Mark Burhenne](https://twitter.com/askthedentist?s=20&t=BZEw1VWzobRVF2J4xfWFNg), DDS. Family Dentist & advisor for Bristle, ‍Co-Founder, AskTheDentist.com
-  Studies have shown that people with poor sleep have a higher prevalence of gum disease. Poor sleep has also been tied to craving and eating more sugary or carbohydrate-based foods, which may contribute to tooth decay. In other words – healthy sleep, healthy you.
- Less Sleep = Weaker Defenses. [Research](https://aacnjournals.org/ccnonline/article/32/2/e19/20424/Sleep-and-Immune-Function) shows that individuals sleeping 6 hours or less a night were more than 4 times more likely to catch a cold compared to those who were logging 7+ hours of sleep. With every hour of sleep lost, the risk of catching a cold continued to rise. 

## Benefits of good sleep
- Sleeping better = having fewer cravings, better mental health, more energy, improved skin, and less pain.
- [Recent findings](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3781773/) show that regulation of metabolism by the circadian clock and its components is reciprocal. Specifically, components of the circadian clock sense alterations in the cell's metabolism.

