## How do you know whether you’re routinely getting enough sleep?

> 1.  after waking up in the morning, could you fall back asleep at ten or eleven a.m.? If the answer is “yes,” you are likely not getting sufficient sleep quantity and/or quality

> 2.  can you function optimally without caffeine before noon? If the answer is “no,” then you are most likely self-medicating your state of chronic sleep deprivation.

## How do you know what is your optimal wake-up and sleep time?
Adults have a built-in day, which averages about 24 hours; indoor lighting does affect circadian rhythms, and most people attain their best-quality sleep during their chronotype-determined sleep periods. A study by Czeisler et al. at Harvard found the range for normal, healthy adults of all ages to be quite narrow: 24 hours and 11 minutes ± 16 minutes. In normal subjects outside the laboratory, this "clock" is reset, primarily by exposure to light, so that it follows the 24-hour light/dark cycle of the Earth's rotation.

**[1. Chronotype Quiz](https://thepowerofwhenquiz.com)**

Your body has been programmed to function much better at certain times of the day than others. Based on general morningness and eveningness preferences, different people fall into different classifications, called “Chronotypes”. I’m sure you’ve heard someone say, “I’m not a morning person”, well there’s a reason for that. Some people are meant to be more productive in the morning than at night, and vice versa. I’ve listed some quizzes that might give you an idea about your chronotype.

**[2. AutoMEQ](https://chronotype-self-test.info/index.php?sid=61524&newtest=Y)**